feat: prisma lesson (#28230)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: nodeJS/orms/prisma_orm.md

### Introduction

> Tired of writing raw SQL queries in your projects? In this lesson, we'll talk about Object Relational Mappers (ORM for short). ORMs are tools that let you manipulate data in your database and are widely used in the software industry. We'll dive deep into one ORM popular in the Node.js landscape: [Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/).

Reviewer: Missed this href from earlier.

```suggestion
Tired of writing raw SQL queries in your projects? In this lesson, we'll talk about Object Relational Mappers (ORM for short). ORMs are tools that let you manipulate data in your database and are widely used in the software industry. We'll dive deep into one ORM popular in the Node.js landscape: [Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/orm).
```

> Tired of writing raw SQL queries in your projects? In this lesson, we'll talk about Object Relational Mappers (ORM for short). ORMs are tool that let you manipulate data in your database and is widely used in the software industry. We'll deep dive into one such ORM popular in the Node.js landscape: [Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tired of writing raw SQL queries in your projects? In this lesson, we'll talk about Object Relational Mappers (ORM for short). ORMs are tools that let you manipulate data in your database and are widely used in the software industry. We'll dive deep into one ORM popular in the Node.js landscape: [Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/).
```

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

- What are ORMs, and why are they used?
- Introduction to Prisma ORM

> - Features of Prisma

Reviewer 3: For consistency's sake, my thoughts are this should be kept as either Prisma or Prisma ORM throughout the lesson rather than bouncing between the two which could imply they are different. [The official (full) name is Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/overview/prisma-in-your-stack/is-prisma-an-orm), if that's what we want to go with.

Author: Agreed.

> ### Challenges with raw SQL'in

Reviewer 3: Is `'in` a typo? It reads a little odd.

Author: It's intended to be a verb: "SQLing" (I don't think it's a correct word but the learners get the point). I shortened it to "SQL'in" to keep the lesson a tad informal. Will keep it as is unless you (or someone else) has further thoughts.

Reviewer 2: I think its fine: I guessed the intention upon first read, so unless this becomes a major point of confusion I'd keep it

Reviewer 3: I have no strong feelings, just thought I'd point it out 👍

Reviewer: Technically should be `SQLin'` if you want to use the apostrophe, as you're omitting letters from the end, and nothing between SQL and `in`

Author: 🤦 how did I not see that, fixed.

With the couple of projects you've done earlier, you might've run into the tediousness of raw SQL queries. Let's briefly discuss some of these challenges.

#### So much more code

> You need a select statement? Cool, write a query. Need a select statement for a different table? Write another query. Or if your programmer senses are tingling, you could create a utility function for select. But now you need a select statement for specific columns? You'll have to modify the utility function. What about filters and sorting? You get the point.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be a good idea to use inline code here to help break up the wall of text as well as distinguish these keywords as actual SQL. e,g,:

> You need a `SELECT` statement? Cool, write a query. Need a `SELECT` statement for a different table? ...

> You need a `SELECT` statement? Cool, write a query. Need a `SELECT` statement for a different table? Write another query. Or if your programmer senses are tingling, you could create a utility function for `SELECT`. But now you need a `SELECT` statement for specific columns? You'll have to modify the utility function. What about filters and sorting? You get the point.

Reviewer 2: Nit: sorry I missed this one earlier
```suggestion
Do you need a `SELECT` statement? Cool, write a query. Need a `SELECT` statement for a different table? Write another query. Or if your programmer senses are tingling, you could create a utility function for `SELECT`. But now you need a `SELECT` statement for specific columns? You'll have to modify the utility function. What about filters and sorting? You get the point.
```

Author: I feel "You need a `SELECT` statement?" reads better than creating a question-ish tone. I'll reserve this change unless we get anyone else's objection.

Replicate the above for insert queries, and all of its variations. Or you could go in a different direction. Create modules per entity. For example, the books module would have:

```javascript
class Book {
  async getBooks(filters) {}
  async getBookById(id) {}
  async createBook(data) {}
  async updateBook(id, data) {}
  async deleteBook(id) {}
  async getBookAuthors(id) {}
  async getBookGenres(id) {}
  // and so on
}
```

Or you could mix and match the two approaches. Create a `Database` class and inherit from it in your entity classes. Or you fancy composition, and just want to deal with pure functions.

> Now do this over and over for each of entity, across multiple projects. You get the point. It can be argued that the above is not a bad thing, as you're learning and practicing, and it isn't. It's sufficient for solo projects, but as your codebase grows, and as you work in teams, you'll realize how much an ORM really helps you focus on writing code that's business critical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now do this over and over for each entity, across multiple projects. You get the point. It can be argued that the above is not bad, as you're learning and practicing, and it isn't. It's sufficient for solo projects, but as your codebase grows, and as you work in teams, you'll realize how much an ORM really helps you focus on writing code that's business critical.
```

> Writing more code is not necessarily a bad thing, and we even suggest that you explore these above ideas in your solo projects. But as you start to work in teams, and large scale software, it becomes imperative to have a standard way of interacting with the database, either with a external library or a homegrown solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writing more code is not necessarily a bad thing, and we even suggest that you explore these above ideas in your solo projects. But as you start to work in teams, and with large scale software, it becomes imperative to have a standard way of interacting with the database, either with an external library or a homegrown solution.
```

> Writing more code is not necessarily a bad thing, and we even suggest that you explore these above ideas in your solo projects. But as you start to work in teams, and with large scale software, it becomes imperative to have a standard way of interacting with the database, either with an external library or a homegrown solution.

Reviewer 2: I feel the below flows slightly better, but not married to it:
```suggestion
Writing more code is not necessarily bad; we suggest you explore these above ideas in your solo projects. But as you start to work in teams, and with large scale software, it becomes imperative to have a standard way of interacting with the database, either with an external library or a homegrown solution.
```

Also, I feel like these two paragraphs are somewhat shadowing each other, and are both trying to convene the same idea: You need to write a lot more code, this is not bad for learning, but once you start working on a larger/business critical software project you need a better way to interact with your database

Author: nice catch

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

> If you haven't applied any of the above paradigms in your previous projects, we highly recommend going back and refactoring. You might end up with a very basic mini ORM for your project. This will help you appreciate a bit more on how a proper ORM will make your life easier.

Reviewer 3: Remove the `on` typo here:

> This will help you appreciate a bit more on how a proper ORM will make your life easier.

Should be:

> This will help you appreciate a bit more how a proper ORM will make your life easier.

Because the below doesn't read properly:

> This will help you appreciate ~~a bit more~~ on how a proper ORM will make your life easier.

</div>

#### Navigating the codebase

> When all database interactions are done in raw SQL, there's nowhere in the codebase where you can understand the database tables, their relations, and column data types. You might have to login to your database to make sense of what the codebase is doing. To attain technical understanding of the project, you now rely on the codebase as well as access to the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When all database interactions are done in raw SQL, there's nowhere in the codebase where you can understand the database tables, their relations, and column data types. You might have to log in to your database to make sense of what the codebase is doing. To attain a technical understanding of the project, you now rely on the codebase as well as access to the database.
```

Most ORMs out there solve this problem by bringing database definitions into the codebase. This is called a "schema". This allows you to quickly glance at the schema of a table and understand what columns it has and so forth.

#### Altering production data

> Databases are inevitable to change as requirements of the project evolve. You might have to add a new column, or populate a new table with existing data. In technical terms, this is called a migration. Without an ORM or a similar library, you'll be hand rolling these migrations, which will be error-prone and tedious. ORMs standardize migrations via changelogs, and have processes to deal with conflicts. Granted, you won't be running as many migrations in your curriculum projects, but as you work professionally, you might do it every other day.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Databases inevitably change as the requirements of the project evolve. You might have to add a new column or populate a new table with existing data. In technical terms, this is called a migration. Without an ORM or a similar library, you'll be hand rolling these migrations, which will be error-prone and tedious. ORMs standardize migrations via changelogs, and have processes to deal with conflicts. Granted, you won't be running as many migrations in your curriculum projects, but as you work professionally, you might do it every other day.
```

### Introducing Prisma ORM

> ORMs pretty much solve all of the pain points mentioned above but it's not all sunshine and roses. There can be a learning curve to fully understand the ins and outs of an ORM and some don't even fully support all SQL features. Even with these shortcomings, using an ORM can be extremely worthwhile.

Reviewer 3: Added commas:

> ORMs pretty much solve all of the pain points mentioned above**,** but it's not all sunshine and roses. There can be a learning curve to fully understand the ins and outs of an ORM**,** and some don't even fully support all SQL features. Even with these shortcomings, using an ORM can be extremely worthwhile.

> In the Node.js ecosystem, there's A LOT of ORMs to choose from, and the community has not landed on a go-to yet. We've decided to cover [Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) in the curriculum because of its popularity and community support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Node.js ecosystem, there are A LOT of ORMs to choose from, and the community has not landed on a go-to yet. We've decided to cover [Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) in the curriculum because of its popularity and community support.
```

> Prisma has all the features we need to complete this curriculum and then some. Prisma is just a library which you will `npm install` and use. Let's discuss some of its features. Then will link to some official Prisma guides to get you started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prisma has all the features we need to complete this curriculum and then some. Prisma is a library, which means you can just use `npm install` to use it. We'll start by discussing some of its features, and then link to some official Prisma guides to help you get started.
```

> Prisma ORM has all the features we need to complete this curriculum and then some. Prisma ORM consists of several libraries, which means you can just use `npm install` to use it. We'll start by discussing some of its features, and then link to some official Prisma ORM guides to help you get started.

Author: I intended the sentence to read that "Prisma has several libraries that you can use via npm".

I don't want to show the commands here as that's best suited during the assignment readings. Do you have a suggestion on how we can reword this sentence?

> Prisma ORM has all the features we need to complete this curriculum and then some. Prisma ORM consists of several libraries, which means you can just use `npm install` to use it. We'll start by discussing some of its features, and then link to some official Prisma ORM guides to help you get started.

Reviewer: That's fair. Perhaps then something like the below?

```suggestion
Prisma ORM has all the features we need to complete this curriculum and then some. Prisma ORM consists of several libraries, so we can use npm to install whichever one(s) our application needs. We'll start by discussing some of its features, and then link to some official Prisma ORM guides to help you get started.
```

Perhaps also change the href for the link in the paragraph above (currently `https://www.prisma.io/`) to `https://www.prisma.io/orm` instead? Since the link text indicates its to the ORM directly, and not Prisma in general/its other products.

### Prisma Schema

The Prisma schema is a file where you will define your models. For example, consider a message table in a chat app:

```text
model Message {
   id        Int      @id @default(autoincrement())
   content   String   @db.VarChar(255) 
   createdAt DateTime @default(now())
   author    User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id])
   authorId  Int     
}

model User {
   // user's fields
}
```

There's a bunch of new stuff up here. Prisma schema files are written in Prisma Schema Language. You can see how not only there are column definitions for the table, but also a relation to another table defined within the `Message` model. You'll learn more about this in the assignment readings.

> This schema file lives in your codebase and is tracked by version control. You can probably guess by now, just how useful this is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This schema file lives in your codebase and is tracked by version control. You can guess by now how useful this is.
```

> This schema file lives in your codebase and is tracked by version control. You can guess by now how useful this is.

Reviewer 3: I think it might be good to mention what the schema file is (that it has a specific naming convention) and that there can be multiple schema files in Prisma. e.g. from the docs:
> It is typically a single file called schema.prisma (or multiple files with .prisma file extension) that is stored in a defined but customizable [location](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-schema/overview/location).

https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-schema/overview

Author: I purposefully kept out this information, since learners will only ever need one schema file for the projects they tackle in the curriculum. They do learn about the naming convention and the multiple files stuff in the linked documentation in the assignment section.

> ### Prisma client

Reviewer 3: Should be Prisma Client (capitalized): https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm

The first reference was okay since it was "the Prisma client" but "Prisma Client" is the name of the query builder.

The client is a separate library that you will use to interact with your database. The Prisma client is a bit special in that it's customized to your schema. Um... what?

```javascript
// instantiate the client
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client';
const prisma = new PrismaClient();

// when creating a new message
await prisma.message.create({
   data: {
      content: 'Hello, world!',
      authorId: 1
   }
})

// when fetching all messages
const messages = await prisma.message.findMany();
```

Notice `prisma.message` object? How did Prisma know that there's a `message` model? Once you create or update the schema file, all you have to do is run

```bash
npx prisma generate
```

> in the cli, and Prisma will generate the client for you. The client can handle all sorts of querying: joins, filters, sorting, pagination, and more.

Reviewer 3: Update `cli` to `CLI` here since it's an acronym.

> You might have a complex query that you just are unable to get right via the Prisma client, or you feel more comfortable in writing a query raw, you can do that too. Prisma supports raw queries as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might have a complex query that you just are unable to get right via the Prisma client, or if you feel more comfortable writing a query raw, you can do that too. Prisma supports raw queries as well.
```

Also, I feel like `Prisma supports raw queries as well` is redundant with the previous sentence (being able to write raw queries implies that Prisma supports this), but not sure

> ### Prisma migrate

Reviewer 3: Should be Prisma Migrate (capitalized). See the Prisma Client suggested change for reasoning.

> Prisma migrate is a tool that helps you perform database migrations. You won't be using it a whole ton in the curriculum, but it's good to be aware of it. When you decide to change the schema in anyway, you run a prisma migration to apply schema changes to the database. These changes are tracked in a `migrations` folder in your codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prisma migrate is a tool that helps you perform database migrations. You won't be using it a whole ton in the curriculum, but it's good to be aware of it. When you decide to change the schema in any way, you run a Prisma migration to apply the schema changes to the database. These changes are tracked in a `migrations` folder in your codebase.
```

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

> 1. Go through the [get started guide for relational databases](https://www.prisma.io/docs/getting-started/setup-prisma/start-from-scratch/relational-databases-typescript-postgresql). It covers migrations, schema, and the Prisma client. Make sure you select "JavaScript" as the language and "PostgreSQL" as the database.

Reviewer: Changing the href should have it land on JS and Postgresql automatically, instead of switching from TS.

```suggestion
1. Go through the [get started guide for relational databases](https://www.prisma.io/docs/getting-started/setup-prisma/start-from-scratch/relational-databases-node-postgresql), which covers migrations, schema, and the Prisma client.
```

> 1. Read the following articles from Prisma's documentation. Try to code along with the examples. Don't worry if things don't stick yet, we'll be practising A LOT of prisma in the coming projects.

Reviewer 3: Typo (capitalize Prisma).

> 1. Read the following articles from Prisma's documentation. Try to code along with the examples. Don't worry if things don't stick yet, we'll be practising A LOT of Prisma in the coming projects.

Reviewer: Same little bit here as before
```suggestion
1. Read the following articles from Prisma's documentation. Try to code along with the examples. Don't worry if things don't stick yet, we'll be practising *a lot* of Prisma in the coming projects.
```

>    - [What is Prisma ORM?](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/overview/introduction/what-is-prisma),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - [What is Prisma ORM?](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/overview/introduction/what-is-prisma)
```
